             Retrieval or discovery?
Minimum evidence standards for attributing scientific
         findings to autonomous agents
                                          Zhengjie Wang
                                    Shanghai Innovation Institute
                                     wangzhengjie@sii.edu.cn

                                           July 30, 2026


                                              Abstract
     Large language model (LLM) agents are increasingly reported to have discovered scientific
     results rather than merely to have executed them. Such attributions are difficult to evaluate:
     the same artefact—a working protocol, a measured effect, a manuscript—is produced whether
     the agent reasoned its way to a new mechanism or recombined material already present in
     its training distribution, retrieved it, or was steered there by a human. We argue that the
     discipline currently lacks the minimum reporting and control standards that would make
     the distinction decidable, and we propose five—Probe: Provenance disclosure, Replication
     across independent runs, Operator-matched controls, Benchmark integrity, and Evaluation
     pre-registration. We then apply the checklist to a recent, prominent claim: an LLM agent
     reported to have autonomously proposed and experimentally validated a previously unreported
     optical mechanism, an “optical bilinear interaction” analogous to the compatibility operation
     in Transformer attention (arXiv:2604.27092). Working entirely from the authors’ own released
     data and analysis code, we reproduce their published accuracies to within 5 × 10−4 and then
     show that the benchmark supporting the computational claim does not survive elementary
     integrity checks: the reported cross-split generalisation is accounted for by the presence of
     self-paired samples, and the remaining task accuracies are inflated by near-duplicate repeats
     shared between training and test folds. Under ordered-pair-grouped evaluation, pair-identity
     prediction is not a well-defined generalisation task, category-pair classification falls below
     chance, and same-category classification is not significant under the exact null distribution
     over all 105 admissible category assignments (p = 102/105). In the held-out-category task,
     above-chance performance occurs only when self-pairs are present in both the training and
     the test set; removing them from either side returns accuracy to chance. We emphasise
     what we do not claim: we find no evidence of data fabrication, the hardware measurements
     appear sound, and the automation achievement is real. The failure is one of evidence–claim
     alignment, and it is the kind that Probe is designed to catch before publication.


1    Introduction
LLM-based agents have moved, over a short period, from assisting predefined scientific workflows
to being credited with scientific results in their own right. The claims made on their behalf have
escalated accordingly: not that a system executed a protocol competently, but that it discovered
something that was not previously known.
    This escalation has outrun the evidence customarily supplied to support it, for a structural
reason. The artefact produced by genuine discovery and the artefact produced by retrieval-plus-
execution are the same artefact. An agent that reasons from physical first principles to a new
observable; an agent that recombines two textbook techniques it has encountered thousands of
times in pretraining; an agent that retrieves a published protocol; and an agent steered by its


                                                   1
operators toward a direction they found promising—all four emit the same thing at the end.
Working code, a measured effect, a coherent manuscript. Nothing in the output separates them.
    For human authorship this problem is bounded, and the bounding is so thoroughly built into
scientific convention that it is easy to forget it is there. A human author’s prior knowledge is
finite, largely declarable, and traceable through citation; the reader can ask what was known
and when. For an LLM agent the prior is a training distribution that is undisclosed, effectively
unbounded, and—in precisely the cases where discovery claims are most attractive—saturated
with the material at issue. Attribution therefore cannot rest on the output. It has to rest on
controls and disclosures that were never previously required, because they were never previously
necessary.
    We propose five such requirements (Sec. 2), chosen to be individually cheap and jointly close
to sufficient, and then apply them to a recent and prominent claim (Secs. 3–8). The application
is instructive beyond the individual case: two of the failures we find are invisible to ordinary
peer review, because they live in the split logic and the label construction of a benchmark rather
than in any statement the manuscript makes. They are, however, immediately visible to anyone
who runs the released code with one line changed—which is the argument for requiring that the
code be released, and for looking at it.
    We state at the outset what this exercise is not. We allege no misconduct, we find no evidence
of fabrication, and we do not dispute that the automation demonstrated in the target work is a
real achievement. Section 11 makes the boundaries explicit.


2    The Probe checklist
P — Provenance disclosure. The backbone model and version, its training cut-off relative to
the publication dates of all target papers, the complete initial prompt, every candidate direction
generated and discarded, the criterion by which a direction was selected and by whom, every
human intervention, and the full agent trace. Without these, the causal attribution “the agent
discovered X” is not merely unverified but unformulated.

R — Replication. At least three independent runs from the same starting prompt, with
the distribution of outcomes reported. A single trajectory from a stochastic system cannot
distinguish an architectural property from a sampling event.

O — Operator-matched control. Where a physical measurement is claimed to produce
information, the control must be the digital reconstruction of the same quantity under the same
operator, not a different quantity. Randomising the operator, or substituting an algebraically
distinct expression, tests a different hypothesis.

B — Benchmark integrity. The evaluation must possess the structure it purports to measure;
train/test partitions must respect the unit of generalisation; and every reported accuracy must
be compared against the best measurement-free rule available on the same partition, and against
an exact or permutation null over the admissible label assignments where one can be enumerated.

E — Evaluation pre-registration. Readout parameters, feature budgets and splits must be
fixed before the comparison of interest, or the search over them must be reported in full.


3    Case study: setup
The target work couples an LLM multi-agent system to a free-space optical platform and reports
three studies of increasing autonomy, culminating in an open-ended investigation that identifies


                                                2
an “optical bilinear interaction”. Two token-dependent fields Ea , Eb are coherently superposed
with controlled relative phase, scattered by a fixed medium T and detected by a square-law
camera; four-step phase-shifting demodulation with blank subtraction isolates
                                                    †
                                   Bm (a, b) = Ea† Tm
                                                        
                                                      Tm Eb ,                                (1)

 a per-channel complex bilinear response. The computational claim is supported by an eight-token
“semantic benchmark” comprising 64 ordered pairs and four tasks: pair identity (A, 64-way), same
 category (B, binary), category pair (C, 16-way), and cross-split same-category generalisation to
 a held-out category (D).
     All material below derives from the authors’ own deposit (DOI 10.5281/zenodo.19890402).
 Our pipeline mirrors 05 result4 refine paper/scripts/analyze advantage boundary.py so that
 any difference is attributable to a single documented modification.

3.1    Replication
We first reproduce the released numbers without modification. For the raw-input baselines—
features computed directly from E(x), E(y) with no optical propagation—the maximum deviation
between our values and the published ones is 5 × 10−4 across all five feature families and all
four tasks. The optical families reproduce likewise, and we independently recover the authors’
participation-ratio effective ranks of the Complex-B feature ensemble: 3.00 at bin = 25 and 9.62
at bin = 10, against their stated ∼3 and ∼9. Nothing that follows is a pipeline discrepancy.


4     Benchmark integrity
4.1    B1: the benchmark carries no semantic structure
The eight tokens are constructed as
def make_token_input(tid):
    seed = 10000 + tid * 7919
    rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
    phases = rng.uniform(0, 2*np.pi, (6, 6))
    return np.exp(1j * phases).flatten()                   # 36 complex
that is, eight independent unit-modulus random phase vectors. The words (cat, dog, hammer,
. . . ) and the categories (animals, tools, . . . ) are labels attached to random vectors; no embedding
enters the pipeline. Consequently the proposition “cat and dog belong to the same category”
is encoded nowhere in the inputs or in the physics. The data-generating process contains no
designed semantic relation from which held-out-category generalisation could be learned; any
above-chance Task-D result must therefore be attributed to a finite-sample accident or to an
evaluation cue, rather than to encoded semantics recovered by the measurement.

4.2    B2: Task D is accounted for by self-pairs
 For each held-out category the test set contains 4 distinct positive pairs, of which 2 are
 self-pairs (x, x), against 24 distinct negatives. The measurement-free identity-rule baseline
“same category := (x = y)” therefore attains balanced accuracy 12 24 + 24 24 = 0.750. Every value
 obtained under the refined held-out-category Task-D protocol reproduced here lies at or below
 this baseline; we do not extend the comparison to values reported under the different fixed-holdout
 protocol of the main manuscript. Removing all self-paired samples collapses the optical feature
 to chance (Fig. 1), identically at both readout scales, while the per-fold values are constant to
 four decimals in the unablated case—the signature of a deterministic structural cue rather than
 a learned relation.

                                                  3
                                                                                                released      ablated

                                                               chance                      identity rule (x = y) = 0.750


 Complex-B (optical, bin 25)                                                                      0.729        0.498


 Complex-B (optical, bin 10)                                                                      0.740        0.495


   Digital bilinear (intensity)                                                                   0.542        0.604


  Raw conj ⋅ prod (no optics)                                                                     0.698        0.708


       Raw |diff| (no optics)                                                                     0.719        0.708

                              0.0          0.2            0.4               0.6              0.8
                                             balanced accuracy, Task D (cross-split same category)

                                             as released        self-pairs removed




Figure 1: Task D is accounted for by self-pairs. Balanced accuracy on the cross-split
same-category task under the refined held-out-category protocol, before and after removing every
self-paired sample (x, x). The dashed rule at 0.750 is the accuracy of the measurement-free
identity rule “same category := (x = y)”, which uses the pair labels and no optical data at all.
The optical Complex-B feature does not exceed that rule, and falls to chance once self-pairs are
removed—identically at the coarse (bin = 25) and speckle-matched (bin = 10) readouts. The
raw-input baselines, which involve no optical propagation whatsoever, are unaffected by the
ablation.

Table 1: Tasks A–C at bin = 25, balanced accuracy, released scoring versus pair-grouped scoring.
                 Feature            Task              released      pair-grouped            ∆
                 Complex-B          A (64-way)         1.0000       degenerate by construction
                 Complex-B          B (binary)         1.0000          0.6522       −0.3478
                 Complex-B          C (16-way)         1.0000          0.0474       −0.9526
                 Digital bilinear   B (binary)         1.0000          0.8917       −0.1083
                 Digital bilinear   C (16-way)         0.4437          0.1709       −0.2729


4.3     B3: Tasks A–C are inflated by repeat leakage
The released scoring applies StratifiedKFold over 320 samples comprising 64 pairs × 5 physical
repeats, so repeats of the same pair are split between training and test folds. We measure the
pairwise repeat correlation of the Complex-B feature directly: mean 0.9828, with 97.0% of repeat
pairs exceeding 0.97 (Fig. 3), confirming the authors’ own figure. Training and test folds thus
contain near-duplicates of the same measurement.
    Re-scoring with StratifiedGroupKFold grouped by ordered pair gives Table 1 and Fig. 2.
Pair identity is not evaluable as an out-of-pair generalisation task when the ordered pair is the
grouping unit, because each 64-way class corresponds to exactly one group; and Task C falls
to or below the 16-class chance level of 0.0625. We verified that the Task-C collapse is not an
artefact of the fold count: across nsplits ∈ {2, 4, 5, 8} every test class is represented in training
(100%) and accuracy remains in 0.043–0.109 at both readouts (Fig. 2c).

4.4     B4: the residual Task-B accuracy is not significant
Pair-grouped scoring leaves Task B at 0.6522, above the binary chance level. This residual admits
an exact test. The same-category label is fixed entirely by a partition of the eight tokens into four
unlabelled two-token categories, and there are 8!/((2!)4 4!) = 105 such partitions. We therefore

                                                           4
                               Task B (binary)                       Task C (16-way)                      Task C, fold-count sweep
                                                                                                  0.30
                      1.2                                   1.2                                                              bin 25
                                                                                                                             bin 10
                            1.00      1.00                        1.00                 1.00       0.25
                      1.0                                   1.0
 balanced accuracy




                                         0.89
                                                                                                  0.20
                      0.8                                   0.8
                               0.65
                                                                                                  0.15
                      0.6                                   0.6
                                                0.50                                       0.48
                                                   0.43                     0.44
                      0.4                                   0.4                                   0.10


                      0.2                                   0.2                 0.17              0.05
                                                                     0.05
                      0.0                                   0.0                                   0.00
                            -B        ear          cat            -B        ear          cat             2        4   5           8
                        plex    bilin        Con              plex    bilin        Con
                     Com igital                            Com igital                                    number of pair-grouped folds
                         D                                     D

                              released scoring (repeats split)           pair-grouped scoring        chance level (0.500 / 0.063)



Figure 2: Tasks B and C are inflated by repeat leakage. (a,b) Balanced accuracy at
bin = 25 under the released scoring, which splits the five physical repeats of a pair across folds,
and under pair-grouped scoring, which does not. (c) The Task-C collapse is not a fold-count
artefact: it persists across nsplits ∈ {2, 4, 5, 8} at both readouts, with every test class represented
in training in all cases.


recompute the pair-grouped Task-B accuracy under every admissible assignment. The designated
semantic assignment is a member of this set, so the exact one-sided p-value is the fraction of
assignments scoring at least as high as the designated one, with the designated assignment
counted in the numerator; no Monte Carlo sampling and no continuity correction are involved.
    The designated assignment scores 0.6522 against a null with mean 0.7280 and standard
deviation 0.0347, and 102 of the 105 assignments score at least as high (Fig. 4); the exact
one-sided p is 0.9714. Approximately 97% of all admissible category assignments therefore
achieve accuracy at least as high as the designated semantic one. The residual is not evidence
that the measurement recovers the designated category structure.

4.5                     B5: the Task-D shortcut is learned, not merely present
Removing self-pairs from the training set and from the test set are distinct interventions, and
crossing them separates a cue that the classifier acquires during fitting from a structural shortcut
sitting in the test set. Table 2 gives the full design. Above-chance performance occurs only when
self-pairs are present on both sides; removing them from either side returns accuracy to chance.
In particular, when self-pairs are present at test time but absent during training, accuracy is
0.4917—the shortcut is available but unused. This is a learned self-pair shortcut under this
evaluation protocol. We note the small effective sample: each held-out fold contributes only 4
distinct positive pairs (2 after ablation) against 24 distinct negatives.


5                      Model–measurement consistency: a diagnostic observation
This section is diagnostic rather than evaluative. It bears on neither the benchmark failures
of Sec. 4 nor the central attribution question, and we report it because it constrains what the
released estimator can be assumed to satisfy.
    Under the stated linear-optical model the unbinned channel kernel Kp =P Tp† Tp is algebraically
rank-one, Hermitian and positive semidefinite; spatial binning forms Kk = p∈Bk Kp , a positive

                                                                            5
                                                                 mean 0.9828 · 97.0% above 0.97

                                                 400                                               0.97


                                                 300




                                         count
                                                 200

                                                 100

                                                   0
                                                       0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
                                                         pairwise correlation between physical repeats



Figure 3: Physical repeats are near-duplicates. Distribution of pairwise correlations between
the five repeated measurements of the Complex-B feature, over all 64 ordered pairs at bin = 25.
Under the released scoring these near-duplicates are distributed across training and test folds.

                                                               exact one-sided p = 102/105 = 0.9714
                                 1.0   all 105 admissible assignments

                                 0.8
           cumulative fraction




                                                 designated semantic
                                 0.6             assignment 0.6522

                                 0.4

                                 0.2
                                                                                     null mean 0.7280
                                 0.0

                                       0.650           0.675        0.700        0.725     0.750          0.775   0.800
                                                               pair-grouped balanced accuracy, Task B



Figure 4: The residual Task-B accuracy is not exceptional. Empirical cumulative
distribution and rug plot of pair-grouped Task-B balanced accuracy over all 105 partitions of
the eight tokens into four unlabelled two-token categories—an exact enumeration, not a Monte
Carlo sample. The designated semantic assignment lies in the lower tail.


semidefinite sum whose algebraic rank is bounded by the number of independent propagation
rows in the bin. These are consequences of the model, not empirical assumptions, and they imply
Bp (y, x) = Bp (x, y)∗ .
    What the release contains is an estimator carrying a reference arm, phase stepping, blank
subtraction, drift and calibration error. It satisfies the ideal identities only approximately. Over
the 28 off-diagonal token pairs the mean correlation between B(y,     b x) and B(x, b y) is 0.6042,
against 0.1537 for the uncorrelated comparison B(x, y); the conjugate symmetry is thus clearly
                                                    b
present but far from exact. On self-pairs, where the model predicts a positive real value, the real
part is non-negative in every channel, but the mean relative imaginary magnitude |Im B|/|  b B| b is
0.3511.
    A phase-gauge offset would reproduce this signature without implying that the cross term
was not isolated, so we tested it: estimating a single global phase, and then a per-channel phase,
from the self-pairs alone and applying it to all pairs. Neither accounts for the departure. The
self-pair imaginary ratio falls only from 0.3511 to 0.3102 (global) and 0.3057 (per-channel), and
the swap-conjugate correlation does not improve (0.5666 and 0.5606). The per-channel phases


                                                                             6
Table 2: Task D at bin = 25 under the full 2 × 2 self-pair design. Identical classifier, folds and
scoring throughout.
            Self-pairs in training   Self-pairs in test   balanced accuracy   test +/−
            present                  present                   0.7292         20 / 120
            present                  removed                   0.4792         10 / 120
            removed                  present                   0.4917         20 / 120
            removed                  removed                   0.4979         10 / 120


are moreover nearly identical (circular spread 0.0019), so there is no channel-dependent phase
structure to remove.
    We draw no conclusion about the cause. Two candidate explanations remain open and are
not separable from the released data: a residual in the blank or reference subtraction, and the
two input arms not sharing a transmission operator, Tx ̸= Ty . We flag that the second would
also weaken one line of criticism available against the attention analogy, since a kernel Tx† Ty is
rank-one but neither Hermitian nor positive semidefinite, and is in that respect less constrained
than the shared-operator case. Resolving this requires acquisition-level information that the
deposit does not contain.


6    The missing operator-matched control
Equation (1) is the cross term of two-beam interference, isolated by four-step phase shifting.
Under linear optics the physically demodulated B and the digital product (T Ea )∗⊙ (T Eb ) formed
from separately measured complex fields are the same quantity up to noise. The decisive control
is therefore an equality test between them under the same T .
    The released controls are not this test. The “digital bilinear” baseline is z(x) z(y) where z is
binned camera intensity, discarding phase; a further variant is described in the supplement as a
per-channel product “no cross-conjugation”; and the pseudo-B control replaces the physical T
with a random complex Gaussian. The first two compare different algebraic objects; the third asks
whether a real scattering matrix differs from a random one, not whether joint measurement yields
information unavailable to separate measurement. The required control is absent, and—because
this experiment records only single-token intensity—it cannot be performed on the released data.
It can, however, be performed on the same apparatus: the self-referenced transmission-matrix
measurement in the earlier studies of the same work recovers exactly the complex fields it requires.


7    Evaluation search space
The evaluation supporting the computational claim involves several free choices, and the released
material shows that more than one value of most of them was examined. Table 3 records the
search space that is publicly visible, alongside what the public record does and does not establish
about when each choice was fixed. We stress the distinction: for none of these choices do the
released materials document the selection timing, and we therefore do not assert that any of
them was made after inspecting the outcome. What the record does establish is that the reported
configuration was selected from a searched space without an independent confirmation set. This
is adaptive evaluation, and the standard remedy—pre-registration of the readout parameters
and splits, or a held-out physical realisation on which the selected configuration is evaluated
once—was not applied.




                                                  7
         Table 3: Publicly visible evaluation search space for the Result-4 benchmark.
      Choice              Publicly observed search       Selection timing         Independent con-
                                                                                  firmation
      Detector bin        5, 10, 25                      Not publicly docu-       None identified
                                                         mented
      Output budget       multiple nout values           Not publicly docu-       None identified
                                                         mented
      Task-D protocol     multiple descriptions and      Protocol evolution ob-   None identified
                          implementations                served
      Feature family      multiple optical and digital   Exploratory analysis     None identified
                          families                       evident
      Token vocabulary    one fixed random code-         Not publicly docu-       No independent
                          book                           mented                   vocabulary


8     Provenance
The central claim is causal: that an agent, rather than its training distribution or its operators,
originated the mechanism. Searching the full deposit we find no backbone model name or
version, no system or initial prompts, no agent trace, no record of human intervention, and no
direction-selection log; the deposit states explicitly that the engine and hardware-control software
are not included. What is released—result-level data and offline analysis scripts—establishes
that the numbers can be recomputed. It cannot establish where the idea came from.
    We note a further tension internal to the released material. The staged reports characterise
the contribution in measured terms: phase-stepping interferometry is “a mature technique”,
and “the methodological novelty is not the demodulation itself but its application to extract a
computationally meaningful bilinear observable”. The abstract of the manuscript describes the
same object as a “previously unreported physical mechanism”.


9     Discussion
9.1    Limits of the computational interpretation
Scale and effective dimensionality. The released computational demonstration contains
eight fixed tokens and 64 ordered pairs, all derived from one deterministic random-phase codebook.
It therefore does not test generalisation to a larger vocabulary, to newly encoded tokens, to
another random codebook, or to an independently acquired physical operator. The target work
itself identifies vocabulary scale as a limitation and notes, in the authors’ released Report 4,
that a related token-family representation previously exhibited degeneracy-boundary collapse at
N = 16.
    Nominal detector dimensionality should also be distinguished from effective dimensionality
on the evaluated data. At the main-text bin size of 25 pixels, we reproduce a participation-
ratio effective rank of 3.00 for the released Complex-B feature ensemble, despite hundreds of
nominal detector channels; at bin size 10 the corresponding value is 9.62. These quantities
are properties of the observed eight-token feature ensemble, not universal rank bounds on
the apparatus. They nevertheless show that the high-dimensional capacity invoked in the
computational interpretation was not demonstrated on the benchmark used to support it:
most observed variation is concentrated in a small number of effective complex directions, and
near-saturated accuracy is obtained on a correspondingly small, repeatedly observed vocabulary.

Speed and energy are unmeasured outlooks. The experiment establishes that the complex
cross term can be recovered on the physical platform; it does not establish a system-level


                                                  8
speed or energy advantage. In the released acquisition protocol, each ordered input pair is
measured through four sequential phase settings. The overall protocol also contains blank-
control measurements, camera readout, calibration, normalisation, demodulation, and digital
classification. Blank controls may be reused across multiple pairs and therefore should not
automatically be counted as a per-pair cost, but they remain part of the demonstrated system.
    No end-to-end latency, pair-score throughput, energy per recovered score, total system power,
or amortised calibration cost is reported in the public materials. Nor is the demonstrated
implementation compared under a matched accuracy and precision target with a GPU, FPGA,
or digital complex correlator. The current experiment acquires the ordered pairs individually; it
does not demonstrate parallel construction of an N × N score matrix, softmax normalisation,
value projection, or value aggregation. Future spatial, wavelength, or temporal parallelisation
may change this assessment, but it is not measured here. Statements concerning high-speed or
energy-efficient Transformer-like hardware should therefore be read as prospective motivation
rather than experimental findings of the present study.

Protocol evolution and confirmatory status. The released reports document an evolving
analysis rather than one fixed confirmatory protocol. Report 4 and Report 5 describe differ-
ent cross-split constructions and report materially different behaviour across feature families.
The later analysis additionally explores detector bin sizes, output-channel budgets, sparse-tap
selections, raw-input controls, random-operator controls, and revised task definitions. Such
exploration is scientifically useful and, when reported transparently, is not itself an error. Because
the documented Task-D protocols are not identical, we do not treat numerical differences between
the two reports as controlled method-to-method comparisons.
    It does, however, change the evidential status of the resulting performance comparisons.
The public materials do not document when the token vocabulary, task definitions, split rules,
bin size, output budget, or highlighted operating point were fixed relative to inspection of the
corresponding outcomes. No independently acquired confirmation set or new physical operator is
used after these choices. We therefore interpret the released performance landscape as exploratory.
A confirmatory computational claim would require a frozen protocol evaluated on new tokens,
a new codebook, an independent acquisition, or another physical realisation without further
selection of readout configuration.


10     Scope and unaudited claims
This audit is deliberately claim-specific. We examine the released Result-4 pipeline because it
provides the empirical basis for the manuscript’s claims concerning optical bilinear computation,
semantic pair representation, and the analogy to a core operation in Transformer attention. We
reproduce and stress-test the public data, scripts, feature construction and evaluation protocol
associated with that result.
    We do not present a complete audit of the two preceding studies. In particular, we have
not independently evaluated the optical acquisition efficiency or the focusing-enhancement
deficit in the transmission-matrix reproduction (Result 2), nor have we reconstructed the full
theory-to-measurement argument, mixed-state synthesis or uncertainty propagation in the
majorization-order study (Result 3). We therefore draw no conclusion about the correctness,
novelty or autonomy of those results. Their inclusion in the target manuscript does not, however,
resolve the benchmark-integrity failures identified for Result 4, nor does it provide evidence for
the specific computational claims tested here.
    Our operator analysis is similarly bounded. We distinguish identities that follow from the
ideal shared-operator model from properties of the released experimental estimator. The empirical
deviations reported in Sec. 5 do not identify their physical cause. They may arise from unequal
propagation operators in the two input arms, residual self-reference terms, imperfect phase


                                                  9
 stepping, calibration error, drift, or another unmodelled component. Resolving these alternatives
 requires measurements and hardware information not present in the public deposit.
     Finally, statements about absent evidence refer only to the public record available to us as
 of 30 July 2026: arXiv:2604.27092v1 and the Zenodo deposit 10.5281/zenodo.19890402. The
 deposit states that the formal Supplementary Information submitted to the journal, the Qiushi
 Engine core system and the hardware-control software are not included. We therefore distinguish
“not present in the public materials” from “not performed”. In particular, we cannot determine
whether an operator-matched reconstruction, additional agent-provenance records or alternative
 evaluation protocols exist in non-public submission materials.


11     What we do not claim
We find no evidence of fabrication. The raw frames, repeat structure, drift monitoring and
transmission-matrix data are substantial and internally consistent, and the reported focusing and
coherence-order results are plausible on their face. The automation demonstrated—sustained
agent control of a real optical platform over hundreds of steps—is a genuine engineering result
that our findings do not touch. Our claim is narrower and, we think, more serious: the specific
evidence offered for the specific central conclusion does not support it.


12     Evidence needed to adjudicate the claims
The deficiencies identified above are resolvable. They require different evidence for the compu-
tational, physical, and autonomy claims; no single additional accuracy value would address all
three.

Agent provenance. Attribution of an idea to an autonomous agent requires disclosure of
the backbone model and exact version, inference settings, initial and system prompts, retrieval
sources, progressively disclosed skills, candidate directions, direction-selection decisions, and
human interventions. The complete time-ordered Meta-Trace and tool trajectory should be
released in a form that distinguishes contemporaneous records from summaries produced after
the experiment. If safety, licensing, or instrument-access constraints prevent release of particular
implementation details, the omitted fields and their relevance to the claimed discovery should be
identified explicitly. Result-level data alone cannot establish the causal origin of the hypothesis.

Prior-availability control. The relevant question is not whether a current language model
can reproduce the mechanism after publication, but whether the backbone available to the
agent before the study already contained or could readily elicit the same proposal. This should
be tested using the exact original model snapshot, without the agent scaffold or experimental
feedback, from the same initial platform description. The prompt, decoding parameters, number
of independent queries, retrieval permissions, and a prospectively defined scoring rule should
be fixed before inspection of the outputs. The assessment should separately record whether the
model proposes the interference cross term and whether it identifies the underlying phase-stepping
and coherent-detection principles as established knowledge. Such a control would measure prior
availability; it would not by itself prove the causal origin of the observed trajectory.

Operator-matched physical control. For each detector pixel, the ideal shared-operator
model predicts
                           Bp (x, y) = (T Ex )∗p (T Ey )p .                       (2)




                                                10
For a binned channel Bk , the corresponding reconstruction is

                               B̄kdigital (x, y) =
                                                   X
                                                     (T Ex )∗p (T Ey )p .                           (3)
                                                   p∈Bk

The decisive control is therefore to measure the two propagated complex fields separately under
the same physical operator and compare this digital reconstruction, channel by channel, with
the jointly demodulated B̄kphysical . Agreement should be quantified in amplitude, phase, residual
structure, repeatability, and downstream performance under identical feature budgets and splits.
If the two input arms implement different operators, the corresponding Tx† Ty model should be
stated and tested instead. This experiment would determine whether joint measurement supplies
information beyond separately measured complex fields; intensity products and random-operator
pseudo-B controls do not answer that question.

Benchmark with a valid unit of generalisation. A confirmatory benchmark should contain
relational structure in the inputs rather than attach semantic labels to independent random
vectors. It should use tokens, codebooks, or physical inputs not involved in configuration
selection. All repeated measurements of the same physical condition must remain in the same
fold whenever the claim concerns generalisation to new conditions. Self-pairs should either be
excluded from relation evaluation or reported as a separate stratum, and performance should
be compared with measurement-free structural rules and an exact or permutation null over
admissible label assignments. Pair identity may be evaluated as repeat recognition, but it should
not be interpreted as out-of-pair generalisation. The final test should use a new acquisition
session, codebook, vocabulary, or physical operator after the evaluation protocol has been frozen.

Independent agent and hardware replications. A single successful trajectory cannot
establish that the reported outcome is a reproducible property of the agent architecture. The
open-ended study should be repeated independently from the same initial information, with
all runs and unsuccessful directions retained. At least three complete runs would provide a
minimal existence check, although more are required to estimate a meaningful discovery rate
for a stochastic system. Replication should also separate agent stochasticity from hardware
specificity by including, where feasible, an independent acquisition session or physical realisation.
The reported outcomes should include the frequency with which the mechanism is proposed,
selected, experimentally supported, rejected, or replaced by another direction.

Pre-registered confirmation. Before the confirmatory run, the token set, task definitions,
train–test unit, treatment of self-pairs, detector binning, output budget, feature families, classifier,
hyperparameters, primary endpoint, and statistical comparison should be frozen in a time-stamped
protocol. Exploratory searches over bin size, nout , task construction, or feature family may be
reported in full, but the selected configuration should then be evaluated on untouched data
without further adaptation. This separation would turn the released performance landscape from
an exploratory result into a test of a specified computational claim.
    Together, these additions would not require treating autonomous discovery as a binary label.
They would allow readers to distinguish four progressively stronger conclusions: automated
execution of a known protocol, recombination of available scientific knowledge, generation and
testing of a new engineering interpretation, and experimental identification of a finding not
available to the model or its operators beforehand.


Data and code availability
All analysis code, the audit modifications and the full result files are at https://github.
com/[user]/discovery-audit. The audit consumes only the authors’ public deposit (DOI

                                                    11
10.5281/zenodo.19890402); no data of our own were generated, and the deposit is not redistributed.
Every file read from the deposit is recorded with its SHA-256 in results/input manifest.json; the
roll-up digest over all 1543 consumed files is b273f7f6c8d5bd8d7bb849e1d9908ea35a8ec171b9870b7cd2cb27b4963513
so any subsequent change to the deposit is detectable. The environment is pinned in environment.yml
and requirements-lock.txt.


Correspondence with the authors
On [date] we sent the corresponding authors a set of technical questions covering the operator-
matched control, the scoring protocol, the timing of the bin-size selection, and the backbone
model. [Their response is incorporated above / No response had been received by [date].]


References
[1] S. Yang et al., End-to-end autonomous scientific discovery on a real optical platform, arXiv:2604.27092
    (2026).

[2] S. Yang, Source materials, DOI 10.5281/zenodo.19890402 (2026).

[3] S. M. Popoff et al., Measuring the transmission matrix in optics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 100601 (2010).

[4] R. Hamerly et al., Large-scale optical neural networks based on photoelectric multiplication, Phys. Rev.
    X 9, 021032 (2019).

[5] A. Vaswani et al., Attention is all you need, NeurIPS 30 (2017).




                                                    12
